## Philippine herpetology (Amphibia, Reptilia), 20 years on: two decades of progress towards an increasingly collaborative, equitable, and inclusive approach to the study of the archipelago’s amphibians and reptiles

Authors: Camila G. Meneses, Kier Mitchel E. Pitogo, Christian E. Supsup, and Rafe M. Brown 

Abstract: A first review of the history, status, and prospects for Philippine herpetology conducted over two decades ago (2002) included a summary of the diversity of topics studied across distinct historical periods, and which characterized the development and accomplishments of herpetological research in the Philippines, up to the turn of the century (2000). In this paper, we revisited this same general theme and, again, re-assessed what Philippine herpetology has accomplished—both as a discipline and a community—over the last two decades. We compiled herpetological publications in the Philippines from 2002–2022, for a total of 423 papers. We categorized papers by taxon (lizards, snakes, amphibians, crocodiles, turtles, and multiple taxa) and category: (1) Diversity and Distribution, (2) Taxonomy, (3) Ecology, (4) Phylogenetics and Biogeography, and (5) Conservation. We also quantified gender and nationality gaps of first authors across the last two decades of publications. There was a significant increase in publications over the years, from approximately four publications per year in the period of 2002–2008 to about 28 publications per year in the second decade (2009–2022). Half of the published studies focused on squamate reptiles (lizards 30.5%, snakes 21%) and 28.4% on amphibians, 5.9% on turtles, and 2.6% on crocodiles. The remaining 11.6% of studies were conducted focusing simultaneously on multiple taxa (i.e., faunal inventories). Diversity and Distribution (35%) and Ecology (26.5%) studies remained popular, while studies on Taxonomy (14.9%), Phylogenetics and Biogeography (11.8%), and Conservation (11.6%) were all on the rise over the last two decades. The categories of published studies across taxonomic groups were biased towards more studies focused in Diversity, Distributions, and Ecology for amphibians and snakes, whereas Taxonomic studies predominated disproportionately in lizards. Thus, out of nearly 100 new species described over the last two decades, most involved new species of lizards (n=72), followed by amphibians (n=14) and snakes (n=9). Our survey of geographical patterns indicates that for some regions where logistical obstacles to research have prevented comprehensive herpetological inventories (e.g., Palawan Island, southern and western Mindanao), the increasing trend towards the publication of brief distribution notes, in part supported by increasingly engaged citizen science efforts, has partly begun to ameliorate lingering geographical gaps. Finally, we found a near-perfect balance between the numbers of Filipino first authors versus first authorship by foreign collaborators (1.0:1.1), although there remains a substantial gender gap between male and female first authors (7.1:1.0). Nonetheless, the steep increase in publication activities, number, and diversity of people in Philippine herpetology is a remarkable positive finding compared to the 20-year period preceding the last review (1980–2000). Our hope is that the next two decades will bring increasingly equitable, internationally collaborative, and broadly inclusive engagement in the study of amphibians and reptiles in the Philippines.

R data visualization: https://csupsup.github.io/PhilHerpsRev/phil_herps_rev.html
